Parents shun threatened schools

Saturday, 4 January 1997     Stephen Farrell

 

Boycott planned as prisoner in`Dunblane' pledge is freed.

PARENTS were planning to withhold their children from schools yesterday after a 
violent prisoner who threatened to "do a Dunblane" was released from prison.

Mothers of children in Eltham, southeast London, demanded tighter security at 
primary schools linked with the family of David Jennings, who has convictions 
for assault and possessing a firearm in a public place.

Jennings, 50, was freed from Swaleside Prison, Kent, at 7.30am the day after 
Greenwich council won an emergency injunction banning him from schools and 
council buildings. He was immediately driven away in a van under police guard.

The former soldier, a father of ten children, admits that he made the 
"Dunblane" threat to a prison chaplain at High Point Prison, Suffolk, last year 
while serving a 30-month sentence for assaulting a social worker. He insisted 
that it was not a serious threat, but that he was simply angry at social 
services for not arranging a visit from his son.

Schools were warned of his threats in a letter from Greenwich education 
authority on December 19. Parents of pupils at one unnamed primary school, 
formerly attended by his children, refused to send them back when term begins 
next week. Building contractors were inside the school yesterday, but the 
council refused to discuss security measures. Parents say that they have been 

promised panic buttons and security cameras.

Shirley Barnes, 41, said: "Everyone is petrified. They told us not to worry, 
but how can you not? My boy is not going there until I know what is happening. 
Nobody is sending their children back."

Scores of residents signed a petition in local shops urging the council to take 
legal action. The council confirmed yesterday: "We have issued security 
guidelines to every school in the borough. Any school where we have had 
particular concerns has been visited by our security staff and the police and, 
if they have recommended any measures, that has been taken on board."

The interim injunction granted at the High Court on Thursday will stay in force 
until a full hearing on Monday, at which Jennings will contest a 250-yard 
exclusion zone around some schools and council buildings. He claims that the 
measures are unnecessarily onerous and would stop him living a normal life in 
an area where he has lived for 25 years.

Jennings's second wife, Samantha, refused to answer questions yesterday at her 
home in Abbey Wood, Greenwich, after saying earlier that her family would be 
forced to move from the area.

His mother, Dorothy, from Charlton, said: "I haven't heard from him today and I 
didn't even know he was getting out. We get on well, but I do not think he will 
come here."

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved