Net lets mums watch children in playschool

Sunday, 11 May 1997     Mark Prigg

 

PARENTS could soon use the Internet to keep an eye on their children while they 
are at nursery school, thanks to an American invention , writes Mark Prigg .

The system, called Kindercam, sends a colour image, twice a second, from a 
video camera in the nursery school to the Kindercam web site, where parents can 
see live pictures of their children at play wherever they are in the nursery.

Parents can switch between rooms in the school by clicking on thumbnail images 
of the room. Once they have located their child, a large colour picture is 
transmitted and updated twice a second, giving the appearance of a slow-moving 
video image.

According to Christian Steinberg, who founded Parent Net, the company behind 
the project, parents involved in a trial of the system checked their children 
several times a day.

"Any time the parents were worried about their child, or had some free time, 
they could log on to our site and see exactly what was going on," she says.

Kindercams have so far been installed in two American nurseries to test the 
system. Each nursery is expected to pay to lease or buy the cameras and for the 
installation of a high-speed ISDN telephone line allowing the pictures to be 
sent quickly to Kindercam's site.


Steinberg estimates that an average system containing six cameras would cost 
about œ6,000. However, she believes that concerned parents would be willing to 
offset the nursery school's cost.

In American trials, parents pay a monthly fee of about $20 (œ13) for access to 
the Kindercam web site. A portion of that is handed back to the nursery, which 
Kindercam hopes will help fund the high initial price of the system.

"A lot of nurseries are also looking at installing a closed-circuit television 
(CCTV) sys tem, and we are able to work as a CCTV system as well," says 
Steiner.

She believes this security will make nurseries more willing to install the 
system.

Each Kindercam camera contains its own web server, which automatically sends 
pictures to the main nursery web server.

According to Steinberg, this server is needed to ensure the system's security.

"With children involved, we needed to make sure that not just anyone can look 
at these pictures. So we set up a secure server within the nursery, which stops 
hackers from getting in. We also encrypt all the pictures before sending them 
out over the Web."

Each parent on the system is given a password and user name, which they can 
also tell other relatives.

"As the Net is global, if you have a granny in Australia, they can see these 

pictures just as easily as you can from your office next door to the nursery," 
says Steiner.

Although the system has been installed in only two test nurseries so far, 
Kindercam is about to install the product in about 50 American nursery schools, 
and claims several British playschools have also expressed an interest.

The company is currently working on an improved version of the camera, with a 
zoom-lens facility allowing parents to see exactly what their children are 
doing.

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved