How schools cut out chip shops and bullies

Wednesday, 5 February 1997     Michael Prestage

 

Michael Prestage on a security system for pupils which could help stop another 
Dunblane tragedy

SCHOOLCHILDREN will no longer be able to escape to the chip shop with their 
dinner money after the the introduction of a new credit card-style pass system. 
It will monitor on computer everything from attendance to what children eat for 
lunch.

Following the Dunblane tragedy, the system, developed by a South Wales company, 
has also attracted considerable interest because of its security potential.

Tomorrow officers from the education department at Carmarthenshire County 
Council will be given a demonstration of the system at the headquarters of ECr 
Concepts in Merthyr Tydfil.

Parents can pay for school meals in advance and this will be recorded on a 
computer. When a child goes for a meal, the card is swiped and a picture of the 
youngster appears on the computer for identification. What is ordered is also 
recorded.

Parents can ask for a weekly read-out of meals eaten and obtain a breakdown of 
their fat, carbohydrate and protein content to ensure a healthy, balanced diet.

For children, the days of bunking off to the chip shop with the dinner money 

will be over.

An advantage for the school is the system will assist in stock control. Demand 
can be measured and the computer can be programmed to re-order when supplies 
run low.

Children will no longer be forced to hand over money to the bully who 
specialises in extortion because the card will replace cash in the school. And 
if a card is lost or stolen it can easily be taken off the system and 
immobilised so no one else can use it.

ECr Concepts is also negotiating with a firm that specialises in school 
security so the card can incorporate an entry function. It can be used to enter 
the school and selected controlled areas. As well as keeping out intruders, 
staff will be able to monitor attendance and record daily movements in the 
school.

If the demonstration is successful Carmarthenshire hopes to test the system in 
a secondary school. Other local authorities have expressed an interest and will 
watch the pilot closely.

A council spokeswoman said: "It sounds a great idea for the future of security 
and paying for meals and other services in schools."

Lewis said: "The card will not only ensure that unauthorised access is not 
allowed at school but can cover simple everyday things like ensuring children 
have their school meals.

"I can envisage a day in the not too distant future when every schoolchild in 
Britain will have one of these cards to use in their schools."


* ECr: 01443 690302

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved