Video curbs school crime

Sunday, 16 February 1997     Henry McDonald

 

CLOSED circuit cameras have been introduced at several schools in Northern 
Ireland in a move to curb bullying, violence against teachers and vandalism. 
One student has already been suspended from school after his misbehaviour was 
captured on film.

The pupil at Corpus Christi college, the biggest Catholic boys' secondary 
school in west Belfast, stole one security camera but was filmed by another. 
Corpus Christi has installed 28 cameras in corridors, stairwells and 
playgrounds to prevent crime.

Other schools which installed cameras last month, such as Orangefield in east 
Belfast, alma mater to Van Morrison, the rock star, and the Girls Model school 
on Crumlin Road, have already noticed a decline in bullying and damage to 
property.

Frank Kelly, Corpus Christi's headmaster, introduced cameras as part of a 
campaign to change the college's reputation for poor discipline. It was second 
from bottom in the government's league table of academic achievements for 
Northern Ireland last year with 16% of pupils leaving without any GCSEs.

"The CCTV has had a moderating influence, especially in the senior part of the 
school. It has been a deterrent to both the vandals and the bullies. There has 
been hardly any vandalism since the cameras were put in," Kelly said. "In the 
past there was a culture here that if you could get away with things then you 

did them. Now the cameras provide accountability. If parents don't accept that 
their kids have been up to no good, we have the evidence to show them."

Thieves have tried to remove three of the exterior cameras at Corpus Christi. A 
brick was dropped from the roof of classrooms to knock out a camera overlooking 
the playground. One pupil was captured on film stealing a camera. The school 
played the video to the boy's parents who forced him to hand over the camera. 
He is now suspended and fighting attempts by the school to expel him.

Kelly said some teachers were initially opposed to the CCTV scheme but now 
believe the cameras have improved pupils' behaviour.

Parents also approve. Carol Wilson from Lower Falls is no longer concerned that 
her son, Martin, a fourth-year pupil at the college, will be bullied. "He might 
have got bullied but even he says there is less trouble in the school since the 
cameras came in. I'm a lot happier knowing the cameras are there," she said.

Wilson believes cameras may also help to prevent tragedies such as Dunblane and 
the flame-thrower attack on pupils that took place at a school in Hollywood, Co 
Down, in June 1994.

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved