Baby snatched from mother's bedside

Saturday, 6 December 1997     Adam Fresco and Kathryn Knight

 

Kidnapper chased through hospital.

A THREE-HOUR-OLD baby was snatched from her cot at her sleeping mother's side 
in a hospital maternity ward yesterday by a woman who managed to evade its 
elaborate security system.

The 6lb 15oz girl, Karli, was born by Caesarean section at 9.50am and her 
father, Karl Hawthorne, was telephoning relatives to tell them the news when 
she was snatched from Basildon General Hospital, Essex, at 12.50pm.

Tanya Hawthorne was in the bed closest to the entrance of the Willow Ward and a 
mother occupying a bed a few feet away saw the abductor and ran to a nearby 
nurses' station to raise the alarm.

Nurses chased the woman, described as blonde and aged between 25 and 30, 
through the hospital but were unable to catch her. She was driven away by a man 
in a black Renault Laguna at high speed and on the wrong side of the road. Last 
night police issued a videotape still of the woman entering the maternity unit 
and an E-fit image.

Police cordoned off the area around the building, a helicopter searched 
overhead and officers with dogs scoured the grounds but no trace of the car or 
the abductors was found. Detectives believe that the woman was able to enter 
the maternity ward because the closed circuit cameras were not being monitored 

at the time.

Staff reported seeing a woman fitting the abductor's description - 5ft 6in, 
wearing a three-quarter-length beige coat - acting suspiciously around the 
entrance to the maternity ward earlier in the day. At one stage she had been 
shown out of the building. The hospital spent œ100,000 on security for the 
maternity ward when it was built four years ago but babies are not tagged 
electronically. Security was tightened at hospitals after the abduction of baby 
Alexandra Griffiths, from St Thomas's Hospital, London, in 1990, and Abbie 
Humphries, from Nottingham's Queen Elizabeth Medical Centre in 1994. Both 
babies were found unharmed.

Doctors expressed their concern for Karli because she was so young and had not 
been fed since she was born. Christopher Welch, clinical director of maternity 
and paediatrics, said: "Without proper food and fluids the blood sugar will 
drop and this will affect the baby's brain functions. The baby could become 
dehydrated and we are worried about brain damage. It is critical that we find 
her." Answer ing criticisms that the unit was not fully equipped to monitor the 
busy activity of a maternity area, Mr Welch said: "The way we organise security 
is that we use staff as security. This lady and baby were almost caught. They 
were seen leaving and were chased by staff who tried to catch her, but she was 
too fast."

Although the baby-snatcher had to go through three doors with cameras trained 
on them before reaching the ward, as there was no one watching the screens by 
the unit's entrance no alarm was raised.

This falls short of the NHS Executive guidelines which say staff should monitor 
all those entering and leaving the unit. The last door on to the ward had a 
numeric lock and intercom system but it is believed the abductor slipped 

through as somebody walked out.

Ms Hawthorne was taken from the maternity ward to a separate part of the 
hospital. The couple - who are not married but who both use the surname 
Hawthorne - have a four-year-old boy and a nine-year-old girl.

Detective Superintendent David Bright said: "We must get the baby back into the 
safe hands of this hospital and the mother. The woman who has taken the baby is 
secondary to our investigation at the moment." Mr Bright said he believed that 
Ms Hawthorne had seen and held the baby.

Mr Hawthorne, a building labourer, had returned to the hospital shortly after 
announcing the birth of his daughter to regulars at Basildon's Barge pub, where 
a party had been due to be held in his and the baby's honour last night.

Geraldine Evans, the landlady, said that Mr Hawthorne had been ecstatic when he 
came into the pub at lunchtime to announce the birth, which took place on his 
partner's 30th birthday.

"As he walked in through the door, he pulled back his jacket and he had a badge 
on underneath saying`I'm the dad of a baby girl'. He was absolutely chuffed to 
bits.

"He told us the baby had been born and how much she weighed."

Karen Humphries, whose baby Abbie went missing for 15 days and who is expecting 
her third child in the new year, but plans to have it at home, said last night: 
"I am angry that his has happened again. It should not happen so easily. People 
should not be able to walk on to a maternity unit. This just brings it all 
back."


Security failure, page 2.

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved