Fear and violence: my typical night in casualty

Friday, 23 May 1997     Kathryn Knight

 

A NURSE gave a graphic account of life on a casualty ward to a conference on 
hospital violence yesterday, saying she felt constantly threatened and in fear 
of attack.

Staff Nurse Laura Hocken, 28, said her worst fears were realised during an 
exhausting shift on New Year's Eve last year at the accident and emergency 
department of Royal Sussex County Hospital in Brighton.

"I came on duty at 9.15pm to an already chaotic department, with trolleys in 
corridors, ambulances arriving one after the other and patients and relatives 
demanding to know how long they would have to wait.

"By midnight the waiting area was standing room only and looked like a 
nightclub at closing time. There were people prostrate on chairs, dripping 
blood, shouting, arguing and vomiting. The nurse on reception was being 
subjected to a constant barrage of abuse.

"By 2.30am she was in tears and saying she couldn't take any more. She had been 
treating a man with lacerations and had had to apply a dressing, causing him 
some pain. This led him to scream disgusting and highly personal remarks.

"At this point the man fainted and his mother-in-law went mad. She started 
shouting for witnesses and was screaming that all the nurses did was chat and 
drink tea. She triggered mayhem. Everyone was shouting and screaming. I 

expected a riot at any minute.

"I went to help the man but as I bent over him he started screaming again. His 
mother-in-law came over, grabbed hold of my wrist and threatened to kill me if 
I didn't leave him alone.

"Then around 5am a 30-year-old man was brought in. He was extremely drunk and 
we put him into a cubicle to be examined. Within minutes he was out and 
shouting and then ran back in and was stood on the bed rattling the sides.

"I was worried he was going to lose his balance, so I tried to calm him by 
putting my hand on his back. He turned his head and stared at me and then threw 
himself at me.

"I fell crashing back on to the floor and he fell on top of me. I picked myself 
up and he tried to punch me in the face, instead hitting another nurse across 
the back of the head. The police came and arrested him for being drunk and 
disorderly but when I tried to make a complaint the policewoman told me it 
wasn't worth the paper it was written on.

"I drove home the 15 miles that morning and cried all the way. I just had soft 
tissue injuries and bruising but it could have been a lot worse.

"Since then I have been threatened on two occasions with physical violence. 
I've been called every obscenity and expletive possible. We are just trying to 
do our job, helping people, but we are a vulnerable target."

The conference, organised by the Royal College of Nursing, was told that 
recorded incidents of violence against nursing staff had tripled in the past 
four years and three-quarters of the victims now felt afraid at work.


Mark Jenkins, registrar at the Royal Victoria Hospital in Belfast, who 
organised a national survey, said doctors, consultants and nurses had called 
for increased security in hospitals and more co-operation from police, who 
often chose to ignore incidents in casualty.

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved