How security failed mother and baby

Saturday, 6 December 1997     Adam Fresco, Kathryn Knight and Ian Murray

 

Network of 13 cameras installed at cost of œ100,000 was useless because no one 
was monitoring the screens.

THE woman who stole baby Karli passed dozens of nursing staff and negotiated a 
security door to make her way into the recovery rooms in Willow ward, where she 
took the sleeping child from the first bed she came to.

Basildon Hospital installed 13 security cameras in its purpose-built maternity 
unit after a review of security following the abduction of Abbie Humphries in 
Nottingham four years ago.

The cameras, part of a review which cost œ100,000, were the type of equipment 
recommended in security guidelines issued by the NHS Executive 18 months ago. 
They cover the main doors and corridors leading to the recovery rooms, but were 
of no use because no staff were monitoring the television screens when the 
abductor entered.

The women went through three doors with cameras trained on her before reaching 
the ward. To enter the maternity unit, the abductor is thought to have simply 
entered the main doors and walked past a welcome desk which is usually staffed 
by volunteers but yesterday was unmanned. From there she would have turned 
right through a set of unsecured doors leading down a corridor.

Next, she would have turned left through another set of doors, again unsecured, 

up a set of stairs to the first floor. At the top are more doors leading 
towards Willow ward. An intercom controls access, but it is believed the woman 
bypassed this by slipping through as someone else left the unit. Video cameras 
are positioned on this door and pictures are relayed to the welcome desk. After 
walking another 30 yards through three more corridors, past side wards and 
nursing rooms, including the midwives' room, the woman arrived at the four-bed 
recovery bay.

Karli and her mother lay on the first bed on the right, leading police to 
believe that the abduction was opportunistic. A woman 10ft away witnessed the 
abduction and ran past the mother's bed to the nursing station to raise the 
alarm. As midwives gave chase, the abductor fled into a waiting black Renault 
Laguna.

After the abduction of baby Abbie, it was decided not to tag newborn babies in 
the unit because doctors felt the devices could be tampered with. Instead, 
security relies heavily on the vigilance of staff.

Sue Jennings, chief executive at the hospital, said there would be a full 
security review. "There was a review after the abduction of baby Humphries and 
specific instructions were left with parents not to let their children go with 
anyone unless they knew them," she said.

However, Bill Brown, a loading supervisor whose daughter Gemma, 18, gave birth 
to a daughter on the Willow Ward three weeks ago, said last night he was 
appalled at the lack of security during visits he made to the ward. Mr Brown, 
51 of Basildon, Essex, said he had been able to walk around unchallenged when 
trying to locate his daughter's bed. "The doors are never locked apart from at 
night. I was not challenged by anyone as to who I was or what I was doing 
there."


NHS guidelines say: "It is vital that parents, visitors and staff are aware of 
the importance of security measures, to report any suspicious behaviour, to 
challenge unidentified people and never to leave infants unattended." Under 
these guidelines, staff are supposed to monitor comings and goings at the 
entrance to the unit. A system for all visitors to check in at a nurses' 
station is recommended. The guidelines recommend that infants should be in view 
of their parents. However, the mother in this case was recovering from an 
anaesthetic and was not alert.

Between 30 and 40 babies are snatched each year - the majority taken from the 
street - but most are recovered almost immediately. According to the Portia 
Trust, which helps women who abduct babies, fewer than 20 infants have been 
missing for more than a few hours in the past 30 years. Most were recovered, 
unharmed, within a week. The longest absence was six months. Ken Norman, who 
runs the trust, has dealt with hundreds of cases. He predicts that there will 
probably be at least 20 more abductions in the next few weeks because of the 
publicity surrounding yesterday's incident.

Sidney Crown, a consultant psychotherapist, said that there were three types of 
women who snatched babies, all typically of below-average intelligence. Some 
would pick up an infant on impulse. Others hated other women and who stole a 
baby to hurt them. A third group were those who lived in a fantasy world, 
believing they could have a ready-made family.

Copyright (c) 1997 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved