Schools to get millions for security

Sunday, 8 December 1996     Richard Fairbairn

 

SCOTTISH schools are to be given funding to install video surveillance systems 
in classrooms. Details of the multi-million-pound package to improve school 
security will be announced by Michael Forsyth, the Scottish secretary, 
tomorrow.

The announcement will come as part of a package of funding measures on areas 
Forsyth sees as vote-winners. They include extra cash for law and order, higher 
education, health and the homeless. Scottish Enterprise will also benefit in an 
increased budget for the coming year, according to Scottish Office sources.

The financial package will be announced to the Scottish Grand Committee meeting 
in Hamilton tomorrow.

The security move, which may owe more to Big Brother than Mr Chips, could end 
the tradition of rowdy pupils running amok only to calm down as teacher 
approaches.

Schools are being offered a system which, for as little as œ1 a day, will allow 
classes to be monitored, lessons to be overheard and emergency help to be 
summoned, all by means of a tiny camera which sends images down a telephone 
wire.

The grant, to be made available to local authorities, is worth up to œ9m over 
three years and is specifically to cover extra spending on school security 

measures. This was recommended in both the Cullen report into the Dunblane 
shootings and the Department for Education report compiled after the murder of 
Philip Lawrence, the London headmaster.

Many authorities are interested in equipping schools with closed-circuit 
television (CCTV), electronic or videophone entry and other measures to improve 
school security, including out-of-hours protection against fire raising and 
vandalism. Until now, funding constraints have dissuaded most.

For the first time the grant will pay for indoor CCTV, not just to ensure the 
safety of teachers but also as a potential learning aid. Telecom Sciences 
Corporation (TSC), based in Airdrie, has developed a system called Safety Net, 
which aims to combine the security applications of a camera with the learning 
potential of the Internet.

It says that far from regarding the system as a Big Brother to spy on pupils, 
schools involved at the development stages of Safety Net were enthusiastic 
about its ability to link to the Internet and video-conferencing, even allowing 
teachers in other countries to communicate with Scottish pupils. Out of normal 
hours, it can be reconfigured into a standard CCTV system.

Bill Pike, TSC's national sales director, said the response had been 
overwhelming. He said that as a disciplinary tool, the mere presence of a 
camera, even one that is not switched on, has a calming influence on pupils. It 
can also be important if an incident has taken place. "Instead of just being 
told they are wrong, a pupil or their parents could be shown video evidence of 
misbehaviour. It has proven to be far more effective than old-fashioned finger 
wagging," he said.

Pike said security and discipline are just two areas opened up by the system. 

Another is the sharing of resources and teaching methods. "If hooked up by 
video-conferencing, you could have pupils in a Glasgow classroom, pupils in an 
Edinburgh classroom and pupils in an Inverness classroom, all learning Gaelic 
from a teacher in Wick," he said.

It could also transform the way student teachers are trained, giving them the 
opportunity to observe actual classroom scenes without the need to be in the 
classroom watching from a corner, which can in itself cause disruption and put 
both students and teachers on edge.

Additional reporting: Ian Hernon

Copyright (c) 1996 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved