How to make schools safe

Friday, 24 May 1996     Susan Elkin

 

Susan Elkin offers solutions to the growing problem of dangerous intruders.

School security will be back in the news next week, as head teachers vent their 
anxieties about the state of their premises and their vulnerability in the face 
of aggressive and abusive adults.

The tragic deaths of Philip Lawrence, the head teacher who died protecting a 
pupil, and of Nicky Conroy, the schoolgirl shot dead while quietly at work in a 
school classroom, should have focused attention on the problem of how to keep 
undesirables away from schools. Unfortunately they did not or not enough.

Before last week's government report on the subject could be compiled, the 
school security timebomb, which has ticked menacingly for years, finally blew 
up. The deranged Thomas Hamilton ran amok and killed 16 infants and a teacher 
at Dunblane in March.

Less dramatic but nonetheless serious breaches of school security go on all the 
time. About four years ago, I had to drive an injured 60-year-old male 
colleague to hospital. Three young thugs had arrived, trespassing on our girls' 
school premises via the open side-door. Ron, a smallish, white-haired man, 
challenged the intruders. Their vicious attack left him on the ground, his face 
so badly bruised and bleeding that we feared for his left eye.

My office was near the ever-problematic side-door, in an out-of-the-way corner. 

On several occasions, outside visitors arrived unexpectedly at my door. Usually 
they were affable, having made a genuine error. On one or two occasions they 
were alarmingly aggressive. In the end, I never sat working in there with the 
door unlocked. If I was doubtful, I rang for reinforcements before I opened up.

I learnt a salutary lesson when I needed special protection one lunchtime when 
an aggrieved mother marched in to "sort me out". My crime? I had reprimanded 
her less-than-angelic daughter for misbehaviour.

Several schools in my area have suffered devastating arson attacks. Millions 
have had to be spent on refurbishment or rebuilding, simply because arsonists 
could walk on to school premises at will.

Then there is theft. It is quite common for thieves to wander into school in 
search of easy pickings during the working day. I taught in one school where 
people and property had to be protected by a security guard with an alsatian 
during parents' evenings.

It is getting worse, for two reasons. First, criminal behaviour seems to be 
increasing at an alarming rate. Too many people have too little to do, and 
amorality is becoming the norm.

Secondly, many school buildings are in a parlous state. Fences are non-existent 
or damaged, flimsy doors need repairing, many sites are ill-lit and not enough 
use is made of alarms. Most of this comes down to money and priorities.

There are at least four things, already done by some and addressed in last 
week's report, which all schools should now be required, and assisted 
financially, to do.


No school building should have more than one main door. Other doors should be 
alarmed emergency fire exits, opening only from the inside. The main door 
should have an entryphone system. Once school is in session, no one should be 
able to get onto the premises uninvited.

There should be a vehicle barrier at the main gate or entrance to the grounds 
and an intercom connection to the main office. This would prevent unwanted or 
unknown vehicles from being driven onto the site.

Every visitor should be issued with an electronic tag so that the school office 
can track precisely who is on the premises.

All school sites should be properly fenced. Open green sites which double as 
unofficial public parks for the local community at weekends and after school 
hours are simply not safe. I know one formerly "open" school which was 
comprehensively fenced just before Christmas. Staff and pupils unanimously 
report that they feel much safer now.

And lastly, public footpaths. The last three schools I have taught at have all 
been traversed by public rights of way. Since you cannot always distinguish the 
harmful from the harmless, it should be a condition of planning permission that 
footpaths are diverted off site when new schools are proposed. Schools and 
local education authorities should, moreover, be applying, as a matter of 
priority, to move all the existing paths which cross school sites.

Some local authorities are reputed to "require" a specific accident tally at a 
danger spot on the road before they will sanction the construction of a zebra 
crossing. Are we seeing the same careless-of-life attitude to the safety of 
children and adults in schools?


Copyright (c) 1996 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved