Lessons in building safer classrooms

Thursday, 14 March 1996     From Quentin Letts in New York

 

INTRUDERS are an increasing danger at schools in the United States, where 
educationists have formed a four-point plan to handle emergencies.

Ronald Stephens, director of the California-based National School Safety 
Centre, said: "Schools are easy targets, particularly elementary schools where 
most of the people are women or small children." Violence accounts, on average, 
for 40 deaths a year in American schools.

Mr Stephens offered a "safe school plan" with four main recommendations:

Control campus access, ensuring that strangers report to a single reception 
desk.

Introduce better communications between teachers and reception, and agree an 
emergency signal or code.

Appoint a specific school spokesman to handle the media in an emergency. Give 
law enforcement agencies a map of the school.

In some American primary schools parents are given a Pin number, similar to 
those for bank machines, which they must use to the school. Uniformed security 
guards are a common sight at urban elementary schools, while an increasing 
number of high schools have metal detectors through which pupils and visitors 
must pass. This reduces the number of knifing incidents on campus.


June Million of the National Association of Elementary School Principals said 
that schools were being designed with security in mind. It was sensible to 
limit the number of school entrances. Ms Million said: "The principal of a 
school in Montana which had a violent incident told me that the first 
anniversary of the attack was terrible for the children."

A report by the National School Safety Centre stated: "If schools were ever 
`islands of safety' within otherwise violent neighbourhoods, they certainly are 
no longer."

The Dunblane shootings were given extensive coverage on American television. Mr 
Stephens said: "This type of terroristic violence is no respecter of geography. 
We know how you feel."

Copyright (c) 1996 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved