Schools must not be turned into little fortresses

Thursday, 17 October 1996     Richard Ford, Dominic Kennedy and David Charter

 

SCHOOLS must ensure that teachers have regular training in coping with 
aggressive intruders and should consider fitting panic buttons in outlying 
classrooms, Lord Cullen advised.

A checklist of measures to improve classroom security was set out in the 
report, but he was adamant that schools should not become fortresses.

Every school had different safety needs, but each required a thorough risk 
assessment in the light of the Dunblane massacre. "If a blanket approach to the 
installation of measures is adopted, this may involve unnecessary or 
inappropriate expenditure." He added: "Whatever measures are taken, it is 
unrealistic to expect that the risk of a violent intruder gaining access to a 
school can be eliminated."

Lord Cullen's views echo those of the Government's working party on school 
safety, set up after the fatal stabbing of Philip Lawrence, the London head 
teacher, last December. Teachers' leaders criticised his report for not 
demanding extra government money. Ministers have promised to announce 
"substantial new funding" next month which schools can bid for in April to 
improve security.

Lord Cullen said schools should consider panic alarms or telephones in their 
classrooms, particularly those remote from the main buildings. Closed-circuit 
television cameras would help only if they were constantly monitored.


Head teachers should ask whether public access to grounds and the number of 
doors should be restricted, and whether they needed an entryphone system or 
locks operated by code. Parents and others visiting school might have to give 
advance notice.

Ronnie Smith, general secretary of the Educational Institute of Scotland, of 
which the murdered Dunblane teacher Gwen Mayor was a member, said that Lord 
Cullen had achieved a balance between security and a welcoming environment.

Copyright (c) 1996 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved