'Teacher's just been shot'

Friday, 13 September 1996     George Turnbull

 

George Turnbull describes the horrific kind of events the authorities have to 
be ready for in Los Angeles.

Armed police arrived 40 seconds after Alfredo Perez, a teacher, was shot 
through the brain by a stray bullet from the street as he taught 23 youngsters 
in the library of Figueroa Street Elementary School, Los Angeles. Eighteen 
minutes later, he was on the operating table as a 20-strong crisis team set 
about fighting for the school's life.

Psychological aid followed first aid as the realisation dawned on staff and 
students that a much-loved teacher was dying, minutes after the school had 
begun its day.

Marleen Wong, Los Angeles Unified School District Mental Health Services 
director, says: "A routine begins within 15 minutes of any school disaster. 
Schools are arranged in clusters of 20 for rapid response, and everyone knows 
what to do. Medics are summoned for first aid or to pronounce death. Relatives 
are informed and counselled. The media also need to know."

But school closure is not recommended and the next day is planned carefully. 
The aim is to keep students and parents informed and to present the school as a 
safe place.

Ms Wong explains: "If students are kept away, fear and insecurity will be 

reinforced. The room in which the incident happened should be changed. But if 
someone has died, their seat is kept for a time, with flowers to allow grief to 
be expressed."

Bitter experience has forced the school district to learn from its mistakes. In 
1984, a shooting incident at another school exposed the need for a 
rapid-response crisis strategy. A girl was killed and other students and 
teachers were injured by a sniper "because he didn't like Mondays". A strategy 
was developed.

Wesley Mitchell, the Chief of Police for the Los Angeles Unified School 
District, admits that "the deranged cannot be prevented from commit ting such 
crimes". But with 500 full and part-time officers and 800,000 students, staff 
and property to protect, his role is important. He would like to see the 
British bobby system of community policing in his city. "Making schools safe is 
a community problem," he says, "not just one for the police. Safety does not 
come with wire-mesh fencing. It may mark the territory, but if it can be 
scaled, cut or damaged, it will not keep out undesirables. High solid metal 
fencing is preferable. But security-minded staff working with the local 
community and the police is the most powerful deterrent of all."

Classrooms are locked during lessons and security cameras scour campuses for 
intruders. Students remain in the classroom if an incident occurs, and strict 
rules and procedures are followed thereafter to preserve a safe environment, 
until assistance arrives. Visitors are monitored at entrances by volunteer 
parents or security aids. Some schools have remote-locking doors with cameras. 
Secondary school campuses have two armed police officers on patrol at all 
times. Lavatory visits during class time cannot be taken unless the student is 
accompanied.


That rule was broken in January this year when a five-year-old was raped in the 
school lavatory, at 66th Street Elementary School, by a 16-year-old boy. The 
unaccompanied student was excused from her class in the early afternoon, on a 
day when Carmen Garner, the Principal, was absent. The attack lasted five 
minutes while the toilet door was left open.

Mrs Garner says, however, that "even the President's safety cannot be 
guaranteed". (Two attacks were made recently on the White House, one involving 
a gun, the other a light aircraft.) Yet she considers school premises safe. As 
she patrols the elementary school she now runs, she says: "When these buildings 
were put up, safety was not an issue and that makes it difficult. But I could 
have a police helicopter overhead in minutes, simply by using this two-way 
radio.."

But a 40-second response time was too late to prevent Alfredo Perez losing part 
of his brain, committing him to painful treatment. The shooting was 
drug-related. A second shot had entered an upstairs classroom, but no one was 
hurt.

Rosemary Runcente, the Principal, says: "This is a nice community, but the 
parents perceive it as dangerous." But, with property around the school used 
for drug-dealing and a gang-related shooting that left a teacher's life in 
ruins, it is difficult to understand her praise for the district.

With bullet-proof glass in the windows now, the school is certainly safer. 
Police Chief Mitchell considers the community a bigger problem. He believes 
that it may be 40 years before the development of the kind of community 
involvement that would help to solve such problems in Los Angeles schools and 
that, with a 30 per cent increase in the number of young people by 2006, 

solutions do need to be found soon, so that bitter experience is no longer the 
teacher.

* George Turnbull is editor of Business Matters , published by the Associated 
Examining Board.

Copyright (c) 1996 The Times Newspaper Ltd. All Rights Reserved