

PROJECT REQUIREMENT SPECIFICATION

1 Statement of Intent

Ding Dong Doorentry Systems Ltd have commissioned our group to develop
an idea for a new product. The product will be a door entry system
that will allow a person within a building to use their own PC to
view and communicate to the person at the door. Our task is to provide
a prototype unit and the accompanying software for this project. The
Market Potential for this device can be broken down down as:

1.1 Residential 

Information from AmeriTech (a CCTV security firm) showed that you are
5 times less likely to be burgled if you have some form of surveillance
scheme. The scheme we aim to provide would have to meet the competeing
needs of specific user groups. They can be broken down:

1.1.1 Blocks of Flats 

The increase of PC's in the home may allow this product to become an
alternative to the standard door-entry system. According to a representative
of Castle Security(a local security company) it would be likely to
be unwanted by technophobes and those on a limited income for the
forseeable future as at the moment the majority of people are quite
happy with the system they have; they can already identify anyone
who comes to their door. A secondary issue would be some people in
a block wanting the technology while others may not. Would the system
work in tandem with present technology.

1.1.2 Accommodation with a servitor

The servitors office would contain the PC and during the day people
could be let in by sight only. During the night a form of security
could be set on the main enterances. The potential here is for accommodation
like halls of residence, the security could be contained on a Dallas
Ring which would hold enough information to also act as a matriculation
card.

1.1.3 Stand Alone Housing 

Unlikely to be a market in smaller property, people will usually answer
their door or look out through a window to see who it is. There may
be a market in countries like the USA where there is a significant
gun culture, and residents already have a fear of intruders. The main
market at present would be properties standing in a large area ie.
estate houses. They can have entrances that are set a significant
distance away from the property and could use the improved security
of a cisual communication. They are also likely to have the need and
the money to invest in this form of security

1.2 Commercial

This will be our proposed target market, in light of the Cullen Inquiry
into the Dunblane report And the 1995 NHS Executive reccommendation
the need for low cost security has significantly increased. Lord Cullen
stated

It is regognised that there should be arrangements for security to
prevent unauthorised access to the school.

The Health and Safety at Work Regulations(1974) and as amended (1992)
requires 

That every employer shall make a suitable and sufficient assesment
of ... the risks to the health and safety of persons not in his employment
arising out of or in connection with the conduct by him or his undertaking. 

Employers have a legal obligation to ensure the security of their staff.

1.2.1 Education

By encouraging schools to place this system at the entry points to
their site visitor movement can be controlled. During specific times
the doors would be required to be left open, eg 8.15 - 9.15, to allow
pupil and teacher access but outside of these times access to the
site will be controlled inside the school. Allowing the system to
be configurable will allow this policy to be changed ie. the children
could each have their own dallas rings. Outside of school times the
site will be closed to all but those with security access, which should
have the added effect of cutting down vandalism. In situations were
people are using part of the school out of hours then they will have
to possess a security pass.

1.3 NHS 

The system could be integrated to the front doors of wards that demand
security for example maternity wards. Visitors will only be able to
enter these areas if they have a specific reason to be there. The
Problem with existing NHS security include

* security being lax because no-one monitors the vide camers.

* security is bypasses by people who pretend to be some one else

The system we aim to supply must be quick and easy to use, since there
may be emergency situations where the time is criticall, particuly
a cardiac arrest alarm. The demands on the system will involve Doctors
needing instant access to wards whilst still keeping a level of security
that will satisfy parents.

2 Minimum System

2.1 System Description

Any visitor to the site will be able to request access by ringing a
door bell. If the user is at their PC they can run the software to
use the camera. The software will display one still image pictue that
will be regularly updated, this picture will be save to file. The
user will be able to communicate with the visitor from the PC. If
the user is satisfied that this person should access to the site then
they will be able to send a signal to open the door.

When there is no reply from the user the visitor will be enable access
to the site if they know the correct pin number.

2.2 Software description

The Client-side features:

* Will display a picture which will regularly be updated

* The picture will be saved to a file

* Will handle duplex audio

* The database information will be stored in a text format

* Will supply a way to open the door

* Ther will be an operational mode control (deactivate automatic system,
  indicate a person is leaving the PC)

The general software wil include 

* Keep alive indicators

2.3 Hardware features

The unit will 

* Have a keypad for inputing pin numbers

* Handle duplex audio with no compression

* There will be a lock relay

3 Intended System

3.1 System Description

Any visitor to the site will be able to request access by ringing a
door bell. The program will pop up, giving the user instant communication
with the visitor. The software will display one still image picture
that will be regularly updated, this picture will be saved to a file.
The user will be able to communicate with the visitor from the PC.
If the user is satisfied that this person should access to the site
then they will be able to send a signal to open the door. The user
will also be able to acccess diagnostic information at any time so
that they can find out the current state of the system.

When there is no reply from the user the visitor will be enable access
if they are able to place the correct Dallas ring in the unit and
know the correc correct pin number to go with it. The pins could be
optional.

3.2 Software description

The Client-side features

* Will include database management software

* The program will pop up when the doorbell rings.

* There will be a stored masterkey sequence contained in the non-volatile
  part of memory.

The general software wil include 

* A report on the diagnostics of the system.

3.3 Hardware features

The unit will comprise of a:

* Dallas ring reader

* A door sensor

4 Ideal System

4.1 System Description 

The PC will display a continuous stream of video. The user will be
able to stop the frame at any point, this will allow the user to only
see the most regognisable image the camera provides. The database
information will contain a picture of the person whose pin number
has been typed allowing the user to see if the picture on record is
the same as the person attempting to use the pin.If the picture is
the same the visitor must have authorised access if its different
appropriate steps can be taken. The user will then be able to communicate
with the visitor and enable access to the site. 

When there is no user at the PC, requesting entry will enable the PC
to reply with a recorded message of the users choosing. The camera
will allso store some frames to keep a record of who has accessed
the site. Access can then be gained by a Dallas ring placed in a reader
and typing in the correct access code. The PC will contain a database
of information (pin numbers) with everything running through netscape.
The system will contain a modem to allow a remote site to control
the doors.

Therefore a large site can be controlled by a LAN linking all of cameras
and centrally controlled and viewed through the internet at one specific
site.

4.2 Software description

The Client-side features:

* Will show an official picture based on the users ID

* We will implement an http server

The general software wil include 

* The PC will determine wether the user is absent

4.3 Hardware features

The unit will comprise of a:

* Will have some form of audio hardware compression.

5 Hazards + Threats

Fault: Failure of power system

Reported by: 

Likelihood: High in a remote area, unlikely in urban areas.

Consequences: Undesirable, the system will shut down and will need
to be booted up manually

Response to failure:

The doors can be opened from the inside by the mechanical lock. From
the outside by a key.

Fault: Failure of electonic entry system

Reported by:

Likelihood: low

Consequences: Entry will only take place manually.

Response to failure:

The door will open with a manual key and an alarm will go off. If the
person entering is genuine they will know how to overide the alarm.
If it is a break-in then the alarm will act as a signalling for help.
